If vacillation dwell with the heat of the soul will rue it. 
Shame and honour dash where the courage of a steadfast man is motle like the magpie. 
But such a man may yet make merry, for Heaven and Hell have equal part in this. 
Infidelity's friend is black all over and takes a murky hue, while the man of loyal temper holds to the white.  
This winged companion is too swift for unripe wits. 
They lack the power to grasp it. 
For it will wrench past them like a startled horse! 
So it is with a dull mirror or a blind man's dream. 
These several faces in   : but the dark image does not abide, it gives but a moment's joy. 
Who tweaks my palm where never a hair did grow? 
He would have learnt   grips indeed! 
Were I to cry 'Oh!' in fear of that it would mark me as a fool. 
Shall I find loyalty where it must vanish, like fire in a well or dew in the sun?  
On the other hand I have yet to meet a man so wise that he would gladly know what guidance this story requires, what edification it brings. 
The tale never loses heart, but flees and pursues, turns tail and wheels to the attack and does not blame and praise. 
The man who follows   vissitudes and neither its too long or goes astray and otherwise knows where he stands has been well served by mother wit.  
Feyned friendship leads to slee fire, it destroys a mans nobility like hair. 
Its loyalty is so short in the lait that if it meet in the wood with gadflies it will not quit a bit in three.  
These manifold destinctions do not all relate to men. 
I shall set these marks as a challenge to women. 
Let any who would learn from me beware to whom she takes her honour and good name, beware to whom she makes free of her love and preceous person lest one regret the lors of both chastity and affection. 
With God as my witness I bid good women observe restraint. 
The   guardily all good ways in modesty - I need not wish them any better fortune. 
The false will gain a name for falsity. 
- How lasting is thin ice in August's torrid sun? 
Their credit will pass as soon away. 
The beauty of many has been praised far and wide but if their hearts be counterfeit I rate them as I should a bead yet in gold. 
But I do not reckon it a tawdry thing when the noble ruby with all its virtues is fashioned into bare brass for this I would like to   spirit of womanhood. 
When a woman acts to the best of her nature you will not find me surveying her complexion or probing what shields her heart: if she be well proofed within her breast her good name is safe from harm.  
Now if I were to judge of men and women as I know them a love story it would be. 
Hear then, what manner of tale this is, telling things both pleasant and sad, with joy and trouble for company. 
Grant there were three of me, each with skill to match mine, there would still be need of unbriddled inspiration to tell you what, single-handed, I have a mind to tell you.  
I will renew a lake that tells of great fidelity, of unborn womanhood and narky virtue so straight as never was bent in any test of hardness. 
Steel that he was, his courage never failed him his conquering hand seized many a glorious prize when he came to battle. 
Daintless man though taggered in discretion! 
Thus I salute the hero 
- sweet balm to women's eyes, yet women's heart's desire! 
Shunner of all wrong doing! 
as yet he is unborn to this story whom I have chosen for the part the   of whom this tale is told and all the   in it.  
There is a custom still observed today, where our western neighbour's laws prevail. 
It holds even on German soil in one old corner - you don't need me to tell you that! 
Whoever it was that held those territores gender ruled - nor was it shame to him - that the eldest brother (strange though true) should have his father's whole inheritence. 
That death should serve the rights of which their father's life answered them was the cadet's misfortune. 
Before, they held in common. 
Now, the eldest holds alone. 
Was that not a wise man who laid down that age should have permissions? 
- Youth has its fill of good things, old of sighs and sorrows! 
- There never was a fate so pitiful as age cum poverty! 
I will not palter with the truth: that kings, counts, dukes should suffer despossion of their  aeras, all but the oldest son - what an outlardish ordinance!
